[MUSIC]
>> Good morning everybody. I'm Dominik.
This is Marius, Dominuk NSR.
We're going to talk about how to analyze cellular basements,
and how to find bugs in them,
and about our tool which is called FirmWire,
which helps you do this.
>> Now that we have slides set up,
good morning all from my side,
I'm NSR or Marius.
Before we start, we just want to properly acknowledge the full team.
The tool FirmWire has been
a multi-year effort between a lot of different people,
a lot of different academic institutions,
and it's really a massive team effort,
and we really want to shout out to all the people here on the slide.
Now, yeah.
>> All right.
>> Now, without further ado,
let's talk about what will be the next 45 minutes of our and your life,
if you decide to stay here.
So we will talk about basements and specific cellular basements.
We will look into how to emulate them and why we emulate them.
Using this emulation, we will look into
different exploration capabilities we have with our FirmWire tool,
to then start doing the fun stuff.
We will look into fuzzing,
which ultimately will lead to crashes,
which we will talk a lot of it.
Then lastly, we will talk about how we used
our tool to scale up what we got on crashes.
>> Yeah. So what is this basement?
I mean, you all found your way here,
so you must know at least that it's interesting.
But just to give a short introduction,
I, in the beginning,
before I started this project with all these fine people,
didn't know that a basement in a smartphone,
the thing that actually talks to the cell tower,
is its own dedicated processor.
So it's completely independent of the application process,
the thing that runs your apps like Android or iOS.
It has its own operating system,
usually like a proprietary real-time operating system that just runs.
We're going to go into details, of course, during the talk.
But the interesting thing is that it speaks all the cellular protocols
from way back in the early 90s that you know.
If you're in anger that you still have edge somewhere,
then it's probably still
the space and processes that runs all of the communication.
It's millions of lines of C code that are not really looked into
by anybody on the outside world like us.
This is what we set out to change.
Basements are super juicy.
As I said, they go back way to the 90s,
when security was not really a big thing yet.
We didn't know that you could
run random stuff when you had a stack overflow.
I guess people knew, but I didn't. I was a kid.
The nice thing is that if you think of some complex spec,
it's probably implemented in the basement.
It's implemented in a proprietary way and hasn't been looked at much.
Like XML parsers, DNS parsers, TLS.
There's a whole TCP stack, of course,
and it's because who doesn't want a whole TCP stack.
There's a lot of ASN1 decoding.
If you know ASN1, it's like this binary format that breaks a lot,
used to break a lot at least.
It's a tempting initial point of entry onto smartphones
just because it's right there.
It's the first thing that receives every message over the air.
There have been multiple bugs if you follow the security stuff
recently on bigger conferences.
There was this amazing talk by Natalie who found bugs in smartphone basements,
and they were not only exploitable from if you're next to it with an SDR,
but they were exploitable over the real air, like over the internet.
So you needed a phone number to exploit the phone and run code on it.
There was this talk by Amit who was also looking into ASN1
and how it was broken in the past.
And then there was this talk by the Android Red team
about how they tried to secure the baseband
and about how other bugs they found as well.
And all of these talks were just this year,
so there must be something about this baseband, right, which is interesting.
So let's start from the basic principles
and look a little bit about what are these real-time operating systems running on there.
In a nutshell, it's an operating system,
and it has all the things you would expect from an operating system to have, right?
There's a scheduler, a timer, some interrupts.
It has some notion of processes, and AirTOS is usually called tasks,
and these tasks can interact with each other via messages.
So that's a core operating system in itself.
The baseband AirTOS is responsible for mainly two things.
One is to interact with the hardware peripherals,
which most of the time will trigger some over-the-air interaction,
so some digital signal processors and similar.
But also it has, for instance, a shared memory region with the application processor,
so with the Android or iOS side of things,
basically to support messages and do all the fancy things we need to do for calling,
have mobile internet, and so on.
What's interesting is that the scheduler stack,
so it's a lot of specifications,
but usually the different parts of the scheduler stacks
maps pretty much one-to-one to the different tasks.
And we have here one, let's say, heavily simplified tasks
for demonstration purposes.
Alright, so the interesting pieces, of course, are all stubbed out,
and this would not compile or run.
But just to give you information, this is like every single task
that runs in a baseband, and there are many,
would initialize at boot or whenever the task starts,
and then it'll just run forever.
It'll just loop, and this message receive function you see here, this blocks,
and waits for a new message that it will receive from somewhere,
you know, down the stack or up the stack.
And then it'll do something with it, so if it would be an ASN1 parser,
it would parse the message and then have some outgoing message afterwards,
potentially, or multiple, and send these to other tasks in the baseband,
and then the message is owned, so it has to free it.
And the thing that I found interesting, or that is very true
across at least all basebands we looked at,
is that every single, the spec in the cellular modem is big.
The cellular spec is big, and in the modem, you have almost a one-to-one mapping
between some of the, at least all of the different parts of the spec
and a task on the other side, and there is multiple layers in the cellular spec,
and the lower layer task will forward stuff up the spec, the stack,
oh my god, sorry, good morning, it's early.
And then at some point it'll reach the application processor via IPC.
So now, if we want to set up and find bugs in the baseband, right,
there are multiple approaches, and initially, when considering this work,
we were mostly looking in three, which were over-the-air testing,
static analysis, and emulation.
There's also a hidden force one, which is just reading the specs.
Some people are good at it and doing it and finding bugs by just reading it.
We are not these people.
Yeah, we are not these people, and we don't have the endurance to read
hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of pages, like these specs are really big.
So, yeah, one common approach was just over-the-air testing, right,
like set up the phone, ideally in some air-f shielded environment,
and send all sorts of fun messages to it.
We discarded this because most of the time we will not see what's going on, right?
We send a message, the phone may crash, may not crash,
and we have basically no introspection without really digging deeper
into hacking the phone to be able to extract those.
Another approach would be static analyzers, so taking the baseband binary
and just using some static analysis tools or symbolic execution, you name it.
The issue here is that these firmwares, the cellular baseband firmware,
is really, really complex.
It has a lot of different code indirections, a lot of initializations,
and our experience was that why static analysis may work for some part,
like a specific task or decoders, like for looking at the baseband in a whole,
it doesn't scale enough without giving too many false positives or other problems.
So we decided to go for emulation, so trying to basically take the full baseband firmware
and start it from the first instruction where it should be executed
and then executed all the way to wherever you want to go.
And that's why we created firmware.
It is the first open source baseband emulator.
Full system baseband emulator.
Sorry, yes, it's a fine distinction.
The first one that is able to run and boot a baseband from scratch, basically.
So you can drop in a binary-only baseband, you don't need source, you don't need symbols,
drop it in there and it'll boot, well, for those that are supported.
We support, but we did try it on over 200 firmware images
across nine different phone models and two baseband vendors.
So the phone vendors themselves may be different,
but there's only like five or so actual baseband vendors.
The ones that we looked at are MediaTek and Samsung Exynos.
There's other notable ones such as Unisoc, Qualcomm,
and then there used to be Intel, but it got bought by Apple.
And then there is also Huawei's own high-silicon stuff that people also looked at in the past.
Sorry for if I forgot any baseband vendors.
Let's see how our emulator looks like with an actual baseband.
So we pre-recorded all the demos just to make it easier for us, I guess, the demo gods.
I hope it's somewhat visible today.
It's not too sunny, so it should be fine.
Right, so we start firmware, which is our emulator.
We give it a modem.bin.
The modem.bin file is a Samsung, in this case, Shannon baseband
that we downloaded from somewhere in the internet.
So we downloaded the whole Android image and then we extracted the modem file from there.
This was not encrypted, which makes it, of course, nice for benign firmware analysis like ours.
And then you see here that it boots and it locks a ton of stuff.
On the very left, you see the timestamp, then you see the task,
including what the original name was, and then you see even the C file where this originated.
So this is present somewhere in the firmware.
We need to reverse engineer it to even get these locks in the first place.
And then you saw that this BTL task kept popping up and the last few executions looked the same.
This is because we were in the main loop.
So the firmware has fully booted at this point and then just loops around and waits for things to happen.
So it waits for some communication from the network,
which never comes because it is not really connected to anything at this point.
OK, very cool.
So under the hood, how does Firmwire work to enable these millions of log messages just flying by?
So we split the framework in two parts.
One of the vendor plugins and the other is the emulation core.
And the vendor plugins is basically, as the name suggests, specific for every of the baseband vendors we looked at.
So we have one for MediaTag, one for Samsung, Shannon, Exynos.
And basically the vendor plugin takes this firmware binary and does a full lot of pre-processing.
It tries to figure out where the memory mappings, it uses some magic called pattern DB to resolve symbols, which we will need later on.
And once it gathered all this information, it passes on to the emulation core, which then does the emulation.
So it tries to run the code and it also emulates the peripheral it needs to interact to a point where the baseband runs.
So it's not a full truthful emulation, but it helps us to get it running.
And it provides us a lot of different introspection capabilities, which we'll talk about in a bit, I think.
Right. So the vendor plugins are a firmware loader.
Then we have different CPU architecture support things in there.
So MediaTag is usually weird.
The one that we support is a MIPS 16 E2.
The latest 5G ones switch to NanoWave, which is also weird, but needs extra work to get going.
Then for Shannon, we support ARM Cortex R stuff, which is also one generation older.
The latest ones switch to Cortex A, so actually application processors.
So next to your application processor, you now have an application processor.
There's some SOC specific, as Mario said, memory mappings, etc., peripherals that the baseband tries to talk to.
Like there would be an antenna or something.
Anyway, that we just usually step out.
We just want the thing to boot and think there's something.
We don't care if it looks real or not, just real enough for the baseband to boot.
And then we have functionalities for each vendor to recover the baseband internal logs.
So they're not actually logging all of this necessarily.
They just do some proprietary stuff and then have their logs somewhere else.
And we show them, which is nice.
And then we have this pattern DB, which is used to basically find...
So we don't want to hard-code everything, so we have this pattern DB.
This is how one pattern definition would look like.
We have a pattern. It looks a bit like a regex. It has similar functionalities.
It's like these bytes look for these bytes, and then these are like wildcard bytes.
There's other options in this pattern.
For example, is it required that this pattern exists?
Is it a fatal error if it doesn't exist?
The entry point or something like that, the main map of all tasks.
If this doesn't exist, then we just don't want to boot. It doesn't work.
And then we can run some code as well.
And there's not too many patterns needed to get a firmware booting actually.
So for Samsung, we used 18, and Mediatek only 9 to get the thing running.
And now we have this pre-processed image from the Wendel plugin,
and plug it into the emulation core.
The emulation core, as we saw, allows us to see all those logs,
then flying by during runtime.
It allows us also to just play around with the firmware.
We are GDB, an interactive console, and it also enables us to do fast testing.
We built the emulation core using two frameworks.
One is Panda, which is a QEMU-based emulator,
which was originally designed for Recod and Replay and reverse engineering.
But what it has, it's a lot of nice features to hook into the different parts of the emulation.
And also it comes by now as a Python library, so we can easily plug it.
And the second framework we used was AvaTattoo,
which is basically a framework for orchestrating,
so basically to tell Panda how to run in similar.
And it also allows us to basically stop and implement the peripherals we need.
One other functionality provided by the emulation core, which we heavily use,
is the modkit, or the modification kit, which allows us to inject custom tasks.
So we can extend the functionality of the emulated baseband by writing our own code,
writing our own AirToss task for the baseband,
and put it into the emulated version of the firmware.
There's a list of all tasks basically in the baseband,
and we just, at boot time or at any time, slot another one in there, like in the end.
That's our own task then.
Yeah, and then we use patternDB again to find the symbols the task needs,
so we can use actual functionality which is already there in the baseband.
Like we can use debug log functions,
or we can use different hooks for allocating memory and so on.
So we can really use this modkit to do a full bunch of interesting things.
So now let's look at how to explore this.
Exactly. So I briefly mentioned before we have the console,
which is I think what at least I use the most when playing with firmware.
And it's basically a Python console which directly hooks us
during the running emulation into the emulating process.
So we have a reference to, in this case, the Shannon machine object.
So this is a firmware machine which allows us to control the emulation.
Like we can start and stop the emulation, we can do breakpoints,
we can read or write memory.
And all of this is built on top of Jupyter notebooks,
not notebooks, console, sorry.
And another cool thing on top of these consoles,
or integrated in the console, is we have our own task that gets injected as well.
Like you can write your own task, but we inject this glink task,
which is the guest link task.
It's a custom task that we created that basically forwards things
from this Python console inside the baseband.
So you are on the host, you're playing with your Python,
you can do, as you can see on the right, you can get this glink,
handle to this glink task on the inside,
and then you can call things on this glink.
So you can create blocks, so you can basically allocate chunks of memory
inside the baseband.
You can send messages from inside the baseband to other tasks
inside the baseband again.
You can set events, which is a thing that is internal to the baseband as well.
You can do like, hey, there's something happening.
And then you can also get values out.
So you don't need to recompile your task and re-inject your task every time.
You can basically play around with it from a Python to a console,
which is really handy.
And then another thing that we use heavily now in the next demo
is basically we can snapshot the whole thing at any point in time.
So after, let's say, the boot takes a bit.
We don't want to-- or we are looking at one specific thing.
We don't want to reset the whole thing and reboot to this place every time.
And we can take a snapshot.
It uses the QEMU internal snapshots, and it has enrichment
with these peripherals that we write, for example.
Like, if they have a specific state, we can also snapshot this,
which is handy.
Yeah, and let's see how this looks like.
Yeah, so here, first of all, we start a TMUX session,
which we don't see right now.
But we basically need two windows, because in one,
we will have FirmWire running, and in the other, our console.
So we restore, and the very first, we say that we want to restore
a snapshot, which is the one for this demo,
and that we want to enable the console.
So now we see FirmWire booting up and can attach on our second terminal,
which we will start here, to-- well, to FirmWire, to our console.
And once we're in here, we-- yeah, we're typing.
We can see we have the self object, which is the Shannon machine.
And we can just say, hey, let's emulate for, I don't know, one second.
And we see here some of the messages flying by, so we emulate it a bit.
And now we want to show a little bit about G-Link or Guest Link.
Oh, the demo is broken.
Nice.
Thank you.
Yeah, anyhow, we got a reference to the G-Link peripheral.
And we try to do create block, so we want to--
Oh, no.
Yeah.
Think it's resolutions from the projector and so on.
It worked yesterday.
Yeah, anyhow, we create a memory block, and we run again,
because this is an interactive task, so it needs to run to allocate the block,
which we have now at this address down here.
And this is a freshly allocated block.
So we just use the read memory functionality to read 40 bytes.
That's the amount of what we allocated.
And we see these as all zeros for now, which makes sense.
It's a freshly allocated block.
So let's change this a bit and write some memory in a very broken up way.
And yeah, eventually, we write 40 A's to this location.
And here we are.
It's zero for now.
Let's return, and if we read it, we have 40 A's there.
So this will show a little bit how Filmwire works under the hood.
[APPLAUSE]
Sweet.
So what can we do with-- we can now interact with things in the basement.
What does that mean?
What is a thing in the basement?
As I said earlier, every single cellular specification
is somewhat reflected in one of these tasks.
So this is how, for example, the 2G protocol stack would look like.
2G, of course, is still relevant because it's still enabled everywhere,
especially in Germany.
You should know this.
And well, you can turn it off in more modern phones,
but it's uncommon that people do that.
So you have these different layers in the specification.
And then there's different tasks.
So there is, for example, in this case, a CC, which
is sort of a call control task.
And the call control task would give you control.
It doesn't really matter what all of these abbreviations are.
If you have no idea what any of these are,
you can go to 3GPP.guru, which is the most amazing website
for these sort of things.
Just type in the abbreviation.
It'll tell you at least the location and spec.
You will still probably have to ask JGPT for what the spec actually means,
but that's a different story.
Anyway, this CC task is called control task.
It is for the task that does everything for circuit switch calling.
So in the more modern spec, if you call somebody,
it's actually just a voice over IP or LTE, voice over LTE call.
So it's only bytes and packets flying around.
Back in the day, it was circuit switch.
It was already bytes, but it was circuit switched.
And there's still bytes sent over the air.
And then there's different messages that this CC task will basically
eat and do something with it.
So there's the CC setup message that is sent from the network
over the air in bytes to the mobile device, so to our baseband.
And then the packet is made up.
If you want to know more about what bytes we're
going to send in the next demo, they're aligned with the spec.
And then we can actually call ourselves, which is kind of cool.
Right.
Let's see if--
Let's do this and hope that it works.
Demo goes.
Let's go.
Again, t-marks.
We're starting again from the snapshot.
And attach again to the console.
Now here, we prepared already the bytes we
want to send for this call setup message just to basically have it ready.
So it's what we call the call in it payload or call setup.
And these are the magical bytes we got by reading the spec
and doing a little bit of reverse engineering.
We're getting the guest link task again, or the guest link peripheral.
And one little thing we will do here before actually sending the setup
message is sending another message to the CC task, which
will trigger initial evasion of the CC task.
Because by default, it just spin up.
It's booted.
But it still would wait for the baseband to complete other tasks
before being ready to process over the air messages.
And yes, finding this was painful reverse engineering.
Yeah.
And yeah, the magic message for it is just being typed magically in here.
And yeah, we send it.
And we can see here, if we look a little bit,
that a lot of initialization happened.
And we saw here that initialization functionality is going on.
OK.
With this, we can now move on and try to send the call setup message,
which requires a slightly different header.
So these are headers for the messages being changed down here.
And then we put the actual payload and run the emulation again.
And we can see here already here, down here,
there's radio message call confirmed written.
And we can also see a lot of other CC functionality flying by
and being used.
So we basically now, in quotation marks,
called our emulated baseband or gave it a signaling message,
like hey, here's a call incoming.
So there's some logs that indicate that the baseband has actually
received our call and thinks that there's an incoming call.
Yeah.
So this is what we do when-- or what happens to the emulated baseband
if we send benign input, which conforms to spec.
But what happens if we don't do so?
So what do you want to do if you want to send something that
doesn't conform with the thing that something wants to receive?
You use fuzzing these days.
Everybody probably, or most people would have heard about fuzzing.
It's basically throwing tons of input in a somewhat smart way
into a target until you find some side conditions
that the original author of the thing didn't think about.
You want to find something like an off by one
or some unchecked something where if you just read it,
maybe it's too much code and you will never find this.
But if you just randomly throw stuff at it, you'll find it.
And how do we do fuzzing in firmware?
Well, it is-- so we can do normal AFL++ fuzzing basically.
But we do it against a full system emulated baseband,
which is kind of cool.
For this, we have another task.
So we had the glink task earlier where
you can type things in Python and interact with the baseband.
But of course, this is slow.
For fuzzing, we injected a fuzz task using our modkit.
It then will send messages around that
come directly from the fuzzer.
So basically, it eats something from the fuzzer
and then sends it to some task that we want to take a look at.
And we have custom hypercalls to get this work.
So to get a new fuzzing message, the hypercalls
will also turn on coverage collection.
So the fuzzer will know if it found new branches
in the target task.
And for coverage collection, we had to hack QEMU a bit.
And we injected basically this on the TCG level.
If you know how QEMU works, it lifts every single--
so during runtime, it lifts every block
it hasn't yet seen into its intermediate language
and then compiles it back down or whatever,
emits it back down into the target architecture.
And when we have this lifted block in our hands,
it's basically all of the code.
And it's not one basic block, but it's one translation block.
So it's one code unit.
And we can use this to basically give feedback to the fuzzer
that we found something new.
So we jumped from some place to some new place.
And this edge will be reported back to the fuzzer
so that it can store input that found new coverage
and then do some mutations in a smarter way for the future.
And then we send the message that we received
from the smart mutation to this basement task internally.
For this, we also created multiple proof concept harnesses
else we wouldn't have found bugs, which would have been sad.
So let's put this a little bit more into practice
and look into how would we write our own harness
or our own fast task for a protocol of our choice.
In this example, we will basically walk slowly
through our CC fuzzer.
And for creating your own harness,
so call control, what we just saw before,
and for creating our harness,
one would first to create a new mod for the mod kit,
set up the fuzzer using a special fast single setup function
and specify what needs to be done
during each fuzzing iteration.
So for each fuzzing test case, we get out of AFL++.
So creating a new mod is kind of straight forward
on the one side, you will need the template
in this case for GSMCC just using some includes
and setting a task name.
And then we need to adjust the make file
to basically add the CC fuzzer in there.
So that will be compiled as mod, which then gets injected
during boot time.
- So CC again was call control.
So this is actually the fuzzer that will fuzz this call setup
that we saw earlier.
- Exactly.
And what's the fuzzing that setup does
is sending the init messages we just saw before
in the demo, right?
Like recall that basically the task at boot stage
is not ready yet to receive over the input.
So we need to send one magical reverse engineered message
before, which is what we're doing here
with the fuzzing setup function.
First we get the QID for CC, then we allocate a block
using the par mem alloc function.
So this is recovered via pattern DB from the mod kit,
via pattern DB and called from the injected task directly
in the firm, yeah, in the basement firmware.
And then we set up like once we have the block,
we set up the message.
So we basically set the op, we set the message group
and so on, and then use Paul message sent to,
to send this message we just created to the CC task.
Easy.
Now this would be received and the CC task would be ready.
So we can continue and specify what needs to be done
in a fuzzing iteration.
Here again, we start with getting a small block
from the basement was using par mem alloc.
And this time we will need some space
for the fuzzing input we get.
So we just say, okay, let's leave some space
for whatever AFL wants to give us.
And then we call get work.
Get work is one of our hyper calls,
which we use to communicate between Panda or FirmWire
and the fuzzer and get work.
We'll just get an input, write it into this shared buffer
and reports back to the input size
and the input size variable.
Now that we have our fuzzing input,
we need to continue and give it somehow
to the target task, to the CC task.
Before doing so, we set again up how the message looked like,
like we set the different header fields and so on.
And then copy over the payload we just got from the fuzzer
into the message so that we can send it.
And this is what we do.
First we do call start work, another hyper call,
which will enable the coverage collection
Dominic just explained.
In this case, we want to collect coverage from address zero
to address 0xFFFFFFFF,
which is basically all of the memory in a 32-bit space.
So we want to collect all coverage.
And then we call ParalMessageSendTo again
to send it over to the target task.
And one thing to note here is that we modify our,
or we compile our further tasks
to have a very low priority in the operating system.
So when we call ParalMessageSendTo,
it will actually, or the scheduler will actually schedule
our task out and send it to the CC task,
which has a higher priority.
So this call would basically block,
and we only return to our fuzzing task
once the CC message was processed.
And once we are back, we call done work,
another hyper call which basically says
stop coverage collection, we are done here for now,
and we can start again in the next fuzzing iteration.
- Right, cool, so let's see some fuzzing in action.
And what we're gonna do now is, so I'm gonna show,
this is probably gonna be--
- Let's see. - Let's see.
This may be broken.
- Well, you know, you think command line tools
would just work, but you know, it's not perfect.
- Okay, so, yep, well, we can.
- Anyway, so what you should see
is basically a normal AFL++ command line,
and then you should see, can you switch back anyway?
- Okay.
- Yeah, we give it basically the fuzz task,
so the task that we wanna inject,
when we give it a snapshot,
that we also wanna load from,
and then we give it add, add for, you know,
add, add, yeah, that's the add, add,
for, which is, if people have used AFL++ before,
it's the basic command line that tells the fuzzer,
give me input to this place.
Like under the hood, we actually get the input
via shared memory from the fuzzer, but it doesn't matter.
And then we're gonna start AFL++.
This is without persistent mode,
so that means that after every execution,
the target quits, and then we restart the target,
or we refork the target, so that's why it's pretty slow,
but the stability is 100%.
We can also use persistent mode,
which will make the fuzz task basically just loop around
and ask the fuzzer for the next input,
and then we get up to like almost 2,000 execs
on a single core, which is decently fast,
but of course then other tasks in the baseband
may jump in at some time, so it's not as stable,
but of course it's a pretty good trade-off.
So yeah, so fuzzing works, woo.
And then-- (audience applauds)
If you leave this guy running for a short while,
actually, you can also find crashes.
So the CC task found one critical bug
that was zero day at the time.
We also looked into LTE RRC,
which is another pre-authentication message,
but in the LTE, so in 4G,
where we also found two critical
and one high rated zero day,
and then we used SM, which is another task
that has been explored in the past, as a ground truth.
So in total, we had seven crashes
deduplicated over all of our fuzzing,
and four of them were unknown at this point in time.
- And we reported them to the window.
- Yes, they're all fixed by now.
- Yeah, but exactly.
So let's do the next demo and just look
in how it looks like if we would replay
such a crash we found.
Right, so we're gonna start firmware wire again,
and we're gonna restore the same snapshot
that you would have seen in the last demo.
And then we use the fuzz triage mode,
which is like fuzzing, but it has more logging enabled,
like we usually disable logging during fuzzing
because it's slow.
And then we give it the input that the fuzzer found.
So the fuzzer conveniently named it crash.bin,
and then we ran it against the same modem bin
we renamed to vulnmodem in this case.
And then you see in the end that there's a prefetch abort,
so it's faulting at a PC.
It tries to fetch a PC that doesn't have executable code,
which is usually a good, like a bad sign
from security perspective or a good,
if you wanna find bugs that may be exploitable.
- Fathers will like it, developers not so much.
- Yes.
- Okay, cool.
- And this, so to show that these crashes actually work,
we also replayed them over the air.
So we used some BTSs for GSM, we used Yate.
For LTE RSC, we used OpenLTE.
So you can talk to a little SDR,
and the SDR will then send our input,
like we patched them to send our inputs
that we found that are crashing.
And then actually all of these pre-authentication messages
also caused a crash in the actual modem.
So you see down here, real restart,
which means the radio layer just died
and I'm gonna restart it.
So which is, I mean, this is probably the good case
because this means that it just crashed and restarted,
which is better than other things that,
there's no code being run in this case.
- Yeah, and I mean, that's all what it means
to crash a baseband in that sense.
It's not that the phone dies and reboots,
it's just the connectivity symbol on the top right
will disappear, come back, you will get a little pop-up
in the best case.
But from the attacker's view, they could go from there
and probably exploit the baseband and yeah,
take it from there.
And we were not interested in that.
Instead, we were looking more into the different bugs
we have in a large scale context.
So we collected a lot of different firmwares and--
- Oops, sorry.
- Yep, and the idea is we have some ground truth crashing
or some crashes which work on the modem refast.
How does it look in the full ecosystem?
So if we take other modem images and replay the same crashes,
what would happen?
So with intuition, we could get insights
about patching timelines and similar.
And we collected for this like, I think,
over 200 different firmware images from Mirror,
which has the full Android update
and extracted the baseband modem image file from there.
- Right, and overall, we collected 360 firmwares
from between 2016 and 2021.
Of these, 131s were duplicates.
So we downloaded a new Android image,
but it didn't have an update on the modem image,
which happens, they don't update the modem
as often as the main operating system.
And then of these, we were able to boot 213.
So 16 of them failed to boot.
And in the large scale study,
you don't really wanna look into everything.
So probably they just like,
hanged in something waiting for some data
that we didn't provide in the right way in this case.
- So, and these are the models that we looked at.
So a lot of Samsungs, S7 to S10,
and then A41 and A10s.
- So these are also Samsung phones,
but using a MediaTek baseband chip.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
As well.
And then on Synodo, you can find actually the whole dataset
if you're interested and wanna replicate our study.
- Exactly, and here are our results.
- Look at our study again, I guess.
- Anyhow, here are our results, and don't be afraid.
This figure is overly convoluted and complicated,
but we will walk you through it.
So first of all, each dot in here is one firmware image,
which we downloaded.
And on the bottom, we have the timeline.
So this is firmware images over time.
And on the left, we split up
for the different phone models we tested.
And this graphic is just Shannon-based ones.
And these here are the different crashing inputs, right?
So the ones we found during fuzzing.
And in this figure, we see when there is a green background
behind the dot, it means there was no crash
or we didn't observe a crash when replaying the crash.
When it was a red background, it is,
we saw a crash happening.
And the grayed out ones is, okay,
we had some emulation errors or couldn't access
whether there was a crash.
But as we were large scale, we just didn't care.
We just looked into what does crash, what does not crash.
And I think there are a couple of interesting things to see.
First of all, the SM bug we used as ground truth testing.
We, yeah, we basically saw that it was indeed patched
for good, it never came back later on any phone
after it was initially patched.
The TCE1 crash we found really affected all the phones.
So it was indeed quite a critical vulnerability.
And we also happily see that it was patched
and didn't knock you again.
For IRC bugs, we see that they are not affecting all bugs.
So they are not all phones, sorry.
So there are quite some differences,
which I think is also quite interesting.
And we also see, which I think is one real good outcome
of this large scale study,
that sometimes there's missing patch propagation, right?
We found this IRC1 bug on the STNE in the father,
we reported it.
And only one year later, we did the large scale analysis
and we saw, oh no, on another phone,
this bug is actually still active and not patched.
So we went again and reported it
and got it fixed in the very end eventually.
So yeah, these are some interesting insights,
but let's wrap up the talk.
- Yeah, thank you all for your time.
So we, as said in the beginning,
we built the first public
full system baseband emulation platform.
We have cool introspection stuff
and instrumentation capabilities that you looked at,
including like fuzzing and looking around in a baseband.
We have support for MTK and Shannon from back then.
We found multiple bugs and there's probably a lot more.
So we basically writing a fuzz task is a manual effort.
You have to reverse a ton and then build your task.
And there's probably a lot more if you wanna look at it.
You can go check out our source code
on firmware slash firmware on GitHub.
We have, you know, it's Docker,
so you can easily set it up.
And we have documentation,
which is a big plus for open source project, I think.
(audience applauds)
And with that, we wanna conclude our talk.
You can reach us via email and you can go to our repo
and ask questions starting now.
Thank you so much.
(audience applauds)
- You mentioned Cortex-A already
as an application processor
on top of the application process.
Are there any plans to add support for the Cortex-A?
- Plans, yes.
Time, no.
- Yeah. - PR's welcome.
- Yeah, we are basically typing back to this
every half a year, doing a little bit more,
but never, by now just in the state of a hobby project
for us, we, yeah.
But that being said, we welcome contributions.
So there's still-- - We tried.
That's why I asked.
- Yeah, okay, I mean, we can think
and try to make it happen, right?
- And second question, don't know if it's allowed.
How did you get started on this?
Did you first read the specs?
Did you first try to reverse?
Did you--
- For me, it was first starting the reverse engineering.
- Same. - Yeah.
- Yeah, I have no idea about specs.
- I learned specs during looking at binary inputs.
I think that's-- - So did somebody else
on the team have a lot of time to read the specs or--
- Yes, in the end, we had some people in the team
which were really knowledgeable about the specs,
and also when we were stuck,
we were looking at things together,
and then they can just up with,
oh, hey, that could be this and this
according to that and that spec.
- I mean, and the main question, which is interesting
and can only be solved by looking at the spec
is which tasks are actually accessible over the air,
without authentication,
or which are more critical than others.
For this, you need some knowledge about spec specification.
- Thank you.
(air whooshing)
- Thanks for the talk.
I'd love to have some insights about how much time
and effort went into all of this work.
How many years have you all been working on this?
(laughing)
- Yes.
So I think I, so Grant, I think started working
on this mid-2019, and I joined in around winter 2019.
And then it took, I think, until early 2022,
before we had the public release of the tool.
By, I say 2020, I think we had a proof of concept
kind of working, only for Shannon, very rough,
but at least it was running and emulating, which was cool,
and I think the main milestone.
But then, yeah, fuzzing and increasing on this
took also considerable amount of time.
- And then I started also looking independently
into media tech stuff in 2019 as well, or '18 even,
so it definitely, there was some way to go.
Don't start this from scratch, I guess, but.
(laughing)
I mean, by now there are probably also
like better full system emulation tools around
that may make it easier to, you know,
like all of the fuzzing stuff, at least,
is kind of solved now.
- And also, yeah, for perspective, early 2022,
we released the framework, and just yesterday,
we pushed version, we 1.1.0.
- Woo!
(audience applauding)
- Thank you for the talk.
Could you tell us sort of roughly
what typical firmware security looks like
on these baseband processors?
Like, you mentioned encrypted firmware,
but I imagine there's signatures and things of this sort.
- So yes, some vendors do encrypt the firmware.
Almost all vendors sign the firmware
so that you cannot just modify it and so on.
But beyond this, runtime defenses are--
- I don't, by the way, I don't think encryption
would be a security feature, right, but it's just me.
- Yeah.
So signature checking for preventing you
from running your own baseband firmware,
which I guess makes sense.
And then runtime security protections are,
I would say, a bit lacking behind
for what we know from desktops.
We have basically no ASLR.
(laughing)
Like, we have some sort of heap cookies,
which are, in the Shannon example,
which were just one static string,
similar with Airtos stack, so not function stack cookies,
but cookies for the full stack,
which were static initialized to one value.
So it's a bit stuck in the past,
but I hear there are great efforts to improving it.
- Yeah, if you look at the Android Red Team talk
on BlackHat, you see that, you know,
at least on Pixel, they're working on
getting this improved.
But yeah, back when we looked into it,
there was basically none.
- How do you reverse engineer the format of the IPC?
Is that easy, or how do you go from a crash
to the actual radio message?
So you have the different tasks,
but do they actually just send the content
of the next layer to the corresponding task,
or is there something more complicated going on?
- Yeah, usually a task takes in a message,
does some unwrapping and maybe a little bit processing,
and then takes the rest, which needs to go more up
and sends us on up.
And it all uses, I mean, in most cases,
it uses the same, or at least very similar function
for doing the message sending.
And then for processing, you basically see
how this message is processed,
and you can use this to infer the C structure,
which this message should have had.
And once you created your types for that,
it gets all a little bit more easy to see.
- The task that we looked at were all accessible
over the air with bytes, so it was not that hard.
And they would forward it internally to other tasks
as well during fuzzing, because it's a full system framework,
so that makes it a bit easier.
But of course, if you look into an internal task,
and then you will have to craft some message
that would probably be more harder than what we did.
- Yeah, thank you.
Is there any work to extending this to other basebands,
like the Qualcomm or other vendors?
- Yeah, so with the Qualcomm,
there's one main roadblock at the moment
that Qualcomm basebands use
a custom instruction set architecture,
and the tooling for this is a bit lacking behind, right?
So without having a full system emulator
for Qualcomm basebands, we cannot,
not a full system emulator for hexagon in general,
we cannot build on top of it with our tooling.
The only thing you can do with Qualcomm right now
is use libfl-qemu to do basically a single task
in user mode qemu.
User mode qemu, there's a public implementation
in qemu upstream, and then libfl-qemu
can actually fuzz these single tasks,
but then of course you don't have all of the flashy
full system interaction between tasks and things.
- How do you interface with your simulated hardware?
Do you intercept the API calls
or emulate the register level access?
- We emulate the register level access, yeah.
And I mean, we stop a lot, right?
In some cases, like when peripherals need to initialize,
we don't really care what's going on.
Most of the time, the firmware will just check,
like it writes something, we discard it in our emulator,
and then it will check, is this bit set to one
which indicates that it was initialized?
So we are lazy and just created a cyclic bit peripheral
which on every read access would return another bit set,
and eventually, like once we had this simple approach,
we booted, I think, 90% of the different peripherals.
And yeah, some of course need a bit more work
and more reverse engineering, and specifically timers.
I still have nightmares about reverse engineering.
- From the demos, it looked like you always
use a specific snapshot.
Has there been like selection process
of selecting snapshots that you want to use?
And because it was perceived as runtime
and fuzzing on the runtime,
but did you prepare a specific snapshot?
- So the snapshot heuristic we used was quite simple.
We saw in the first demo that at some point,
it was looping and scheduling in the same task.
We took this address from the BTL task,
which was not important, but we saw this address
and just say, okay, here's a modem,
we'll expect things to happen,
so let's snapshot there, and yeah, we went from there.
- So it's mainly to skip over the initialization for this.
Like you could use snapshots deeper in the stack somewhere
where some side conditions have already been met,
but we didn't do that yet.
- Yeah, I was curious.
In the combination with fuzzing,
I mean, if you can proactively,
like you have discovered in your branch,
you make a snapshot, right?
It's a very powerful mechanism to just start from something
where you have done most of the work
and you're just looking.
And then you're saying like, okay,
this branch I want to get here
and set out the fuzzer to get towards the target
with solvers or something.
- Yeah, I mean, you could do this, right?
You could create a manual harness,
which first does this and then snapshot or, yeah.
Like you could automate it.
We haven't done it yet.
- Pandas is a good choice.
- Great, so we have so many questions.
Unfortunately, I have to give the last question now.
- Hi.
- The trick where you're like scheduling your fuzzing task
with a low priority is cool,
but did you run into cases where essentially
you're stopping too early or like the thing
you're triggering is very asynchronous,
but like your fuzz task has already stopped
and it doesn't get executed anymore?
- Not to, we're not aware of that.
I don't think that happened because we're really like,
we're the lowest possible priority
and every call control stuff is higher priority.
So the schedule will always just schedule
everything higher than us.
- And also another thing is persistent mode, right?
We implemented this persistent lock at some point.
So basically persistent mode, the work would be done
and then the next fuzz iteration,
like the basement continues, the fuzz task gets scheduled in,
send the next input.
By then maybe side condition happens.
Triaging gets a bit messy at this point,
but could in theory be done.
- So essentially every message is like always processed
instantly and there's not like a queue
where some task checks it periodically
or something like that?
- Not in the stuff we looked at.
Probably that can happen, but then you will have
to find some way to, yeah.
- Yeah, I mean one thing to say is also we specifically
looked into pre-authentication messages because this is
like one of the most lucrative attack targets, right?
As it just taken as is and usually pre-authentication,
there's not a lot of state yet.
- Yeah, and you don't, I mean the cool thing
about pre-auth stuff is that it's simple
and you don't need any, like you can just send this
as a rogue base station.
You don't need to be in any case like a proper,
benign cellular person or yeah, anyway.
Anyway, you see my brain is already fried.
Thank you so much for your time.
(audience applauding)
[Music]